[docs] Add documentation for Observe (#44816)
expo/expo: docs/pages/eas/observe/introduction.mdx

---
title: Introduction to EAS Observe
sidebar_title: Introduction
description: EAS Observe is a performance monitoring service that tracks how your app performs in production across real devices and conditions.
searchRank: 10
---

import { ActivityIcon } from '@expo/styleguide-icons/outline/ActivityIcon';

import { BoxLink } from '~/ui/components/BoxLink';
import { Collapsible } from '~/ui/components/Collapsible';
import { NoIcon, YesIcon } from '~/ui/components/DocIcons';
import { FAQ } from '~/ui/components/FAQ';
import { Terminal } from '~/ui/components/Snippet';

> **important** **EAS Observe** is in [preview](/more/release-statuses/#preview) and subject to breaking changes. While in preview, it is free to use.

> **EAS Observe** is a performance monitoring service for tracking how your app performs in production. It gives you visibility into real-world startup times, rendering performance, and user experience across different devices, networks, and conditions.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**EAS Observe** is a performance monitoring service from EAS (Expo Application Services) for tracking how your app performs in production. It gives you visibility into real-world startup times, rendering performance, and user experience across different devices, networks, and conditions.
```

I think we should add what EAS is (a pattern we follow on other introduction pages for services).

> Debugging performance in React Native has traditionally been limited to development-time tools. EAS Observe focuses on production, where performance characteristics differ significantly from what you see during development.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Debugging performance in React Native has traditionally been limited to development tools. EAS Observe focuses on production, where performance characteristics differ significantly from what you see during development.
```

## Quick start

<Terminal cmd={['# Install the library', '$ npx expo install expo-observe']} />

> Wrap your root layout with `AppMetricsRoot` and call `markInteractive()` when your app is ready for user input. See [Get started](/eas/observe/get-started/) for the full setup guide.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Wrap your root layout with the `AppMetricsRoot` component and call `markInteractive()` when your app is ready for user input. See [Get started](/eas/observe/get-started/) for the full setup guide.
```

For first timers, I think if we mention here that `AppMetricsRoot` is a component, it'll be good for clarity.

## Why Expo Observe

Traditional development-time profiling tools show how your app performs on your machine. Expo Observe shows how it performs for real users:

- **Production performance data**: Track startup times, render performance, and bundle load times from real user sessions across a range of devices
- **Release comparison**: See how metrics change between app versions and OTA updates to catch regressions early
- **Session investigation**: Drill into individual user sessions to understand why certain devices or conditions lead to slower performance
- **CLI and dashboard access**: Query metrics from the terminal with `eas observe:` commands or view them in the EAS dashboard

## When to use Expo Observe

| Scenario                                            | Recommendation |
| --------------------------------------------------- | -------------- |
| Monitor app startup performance in production       | <YesIcon />    |
| Compare performance across releases and OTA updates | <YesIcon />    |
| Investigate slow sessions on specific devices       | <YesIcon />    |
| Query performance metrics from the CLI              | <YesIcon />    |

> | Development-time profiling and debugging            | <NoIcon />     |

Reviewer 2: For the table entries where we say Observe is not recommended, we should maybe add a note saying what customers actually should be using instead (dev client and dev tools for profiling, Sentry for crash reporting, etc.)

Author: Good idea, let me see what I can add here.

| Crash reporting and error tracking                  | <NoIcon />     |
| Custom analytics and event tracking                 | <NoIcon />     |

## Frequently asked questions (FAQ)

<FAQ>

<Collapsible summary="What metrics does EAS Observe track?">

> EAS Observe focuses on startup metrics: Cold Launch Time, Warm Launch Time, Time to First Render, Time to Interactive, and Bundle Load Time. See the [metrics reference](/eas/observe/reference/metrics/) for detailed descriptions of each metric.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
EAS Observe focuses on startup metrics: Cold Launch Time, Warm Launch Time, Time to First Render, Time to Interactive, and Bundle Load Time. See the [Metrics reference](/eas/observe/reference/metrics/) for detailed descriptions of each metric.
```

> EAS Observe focuses on startup metrics: Cold Launch Time, Warm Launch Time, Time to First Render, Time to Interactive, and Bundle Load Time. See the [metrics reference](/eas/observe/reference/metrics/) for detailed descriptions of each metric.

Reviewer: "Cold Launch Time, Warm Launch Time, Time to First Render, Time to Interactive, and Bundle Load Time" are all in title case here but on the actual page they are all in sentence case. I think we should use one pattern in both places (and other docs under this section).

</Collapsible>

<Collapsible summary="Which platforms are supported?">

EAS Observe supports Android and iOS. Metrics are collected from production builds and can be filtered by platform in both the dashboard and CLI.

</Collapsible>

<Collapsible summary="Does EAS Observe collect personally identifiable information?">

No. Users are identified by an anonymous ID that is unique per app installation. This ID is not personally identifiable and is reset if the user uninstalls and reinstalls the app. See [Metrics reference: User](/eas/observe/reference/metrics/#user) for more details.

</Collapsible>

<Collapsible summary="What happens when the device is offline?">

Metrics collected while offline are stored locally on the device. They are automatically dispatched when the app moves to the background and connectivity is available. You can also flush events manually using `dispatchEvents()`.

</Collapsible>

<Collapsible summary="Can I test metrics during development?">

> By default, metrics from the `development` environment are filtered out and not dispatched. You can enable development metrics for testing by setting `enableInDebug` to `true` in your app config. See [Configuration](/eas/observe/configuration/#enable-metrics-in-development) for details.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
By default, metrics from the `development` environment are filtered out and not dispatched. You can enable development metrics for testing by setting `enableInDebug` to `true` in your [app config](/workflow/configuration/). See [Configuration](/eas/observe/configuration/#enable-metrics-in-development) for details.
```

## When to use Expo Observe

| Scenario                                            | Recommendation |
| --------------------------------------------------- | -------------- |
| Monitor app startup performance in production       | <YesIcon />    |
| Compare performance across releases and OTA updates | <YesIcon />    |
| Investigate slow sessions on specific devices       | <YesIcon />    |
| Query performance metrics from the CLI              | <YesIcon />    |
| Development-time profiling and debugging            | <NoIcon />     |
| Crash reporting and error tracking                  | <NoIcon />     |
| Custom analytics and event tracking                 | <NoIcon />     |

**Development-time profiling and debugging**: Use [React Native DevTools](/debugging/tools/#debugging-with-react-native-devtools) for debugging and [Expo Atlas](/guides/analyzing-bundles/) for bundle inspection.

**Crash reporting and error tracking**: This is a planned addition for Observe in the future. In the interim we suggest a crash reporting service such as [Sentry](/guides/using-sentry/) or [BugSnag](/guides/using-bugsnag/).

> **Custom analytics and event tracking**: Observe will have some support for custom events in the future. For a first-class solution, choose an analytics provider from the [React Native analytics guide](/guides/using-analytics/), for example PostHog, Amplitude, or Firebase Analytics.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
**Custom analytics and event tracking**: This is a planned addition for Observe in the future. In the interim, choose an analytics provider from the [React Native analytics guide](/guides/using-analytics/), for example PostHog, Amplitude, or Firebase Analytics.
```

Reviewer 2: The changed wording aligns with the wording in the previous item.
